## Abstract {.page_break_before}

**Background**
Sequence similarity estimation is critical for genome analyses ranging from taxonomic classification to phylogenetic reconstruction.
Current practices are still insufficient for environmental samples. Even best-practices samples can only assign a small fraction of metagenomic sequencing to known species...
Given the scale of sequencing data now available, there is a great need for tools that can accurately estimate pairwise genome relatedness in an assembly-free and alignment-free manner.

**Results**
Here, we introduce an alignment-free k-mer based method for quickly and accurately estimating pairwise sequence similarity, including Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) and Average Amino Acid Identity (AAI).
Because this method is assembly-independent and sequence-agnostic, it can be applied to both DNA and protein sequence data from across the tree of life. 
We demonstrate the utility of this technique with two primary examples: phylogenetic reconstruction of the genome-based prokaryotic taxonomy (GTDB) and fast and accurate microbial taxonomic classification.
To demonstrate utility in other domains, we demonstrate proof-of-concept analysis on two published eukaryotic and viral datasets.

**Conclusions**
Containment-based pairwise distance estimation via Scaled Minhash enables accurate assembly-free and alignment-free phylogenomic reconstruction and taxonomic classification across a wide range of evolutionary distances.

## Keywords (3-10)
Overall Genome Relatedness Index (OGRI), Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI), Average Amino Acid Identity (AAI), pairwise evolutionary distance

