## Results

### Accurate distance estimation from Scaled MinHash

_ANI vs ANIb, FastANI_

_Jaccard vs Containment?_

Containment searches enable similiarity estimation, especially between genomes of different lengths.
Max containment normalizes the shared content by the smaller of the two genomes

![**Jaccard vs Maximum Containment to ANI and AAI.** 
The Jaccard Index is strongly impacted by dataset size, and can be especially biased for datasets of different sizes.
As the Containment Index is directional, the difference in dataset sizes are incorporated into
Containment calculation is more similar to traditional calculation of Average Nucleotide Identity and Average Amino Acid Identity, which compared only the sections of genome that align. The shared k-mer content (containment numerator) can be thought of as the alignable sections of the genomes. 
The denominator of the Jaccard index is the alignable sections + the unalignable sections. 
The lower bound of the containment denominator will be the exact same as the numerator at 100% containment, where all k-mers are found within the comparison dataset. The upper bound will be the same as the Jaccard denominator, where all k-mers of the comparison dataset are found within the query dataset, and it is the query that contains any additional nonshared k-mers/unalignable sequence.
](images/containment-ANI-AAI.png){#fig:containmentANI height=2in}

<!---
To assess the utility of Scaled MinHash techniques across evolutionary distance, we generated a series of "evolutionary paths" from the set of 31k representative GTDB genomes.
Each evolutionary path offers six genome similarity comparisons at a range of evolutionary distances. 
For each genome comparison, we estimated Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) using fastANI [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9] and Average Amino Acid Identity (AAI) using compareM [@url: https://github.com/dparks1134/CompareM].
--->

![**Scaled MinHash ANI vs FastANI**
GTDB Evolpaths Dataset](images/gtdb95-evolpaths.ANI-concordance.png){#fig:evolpathsANIvsfastANI height=2in}

### Protein k-mers enable distance estimation at increased evolutionary distances

K-mer analysis methods enable similarity detection as low as a single shared k-mer between divergent genomes.
As a result, exact matching long nucleotide k-mers can be used for taxonomic classification between closely related genomes, including at the strain, species, and genus level (k-mer lengths 51, 31, and 21, respectively).
At larger evolutionary distances, accumulated nucleotide divergence limits the utility of exact nucleotide k-mer matching. 
As protein sequences are more conserved than their coding nucleotide sequences, exact matching of protein k-mers can enable distance estimation acrss larger evolutionary distances.

_Protein k-mers vs nucleotide k-mers: Shared k-mers by taxonomic rank_

GTDB rankinfo: 

  - xx% of DNA k-mers (k=21) are shared within-species
  - yy% of protein k-mers are shared within-species
  - zz% of DNA k-mers are shared within-genus ... etc 

<!--compare heatmap w/ max containment for subset of gtdb data?-->
<!---
For , e.g. Pseudomonas, XX% of k-mers are 	shared within the chosen/published genomes within species. For all published genomes within the genus, a median of xx% of k-mers are shared between genomes of one species and genomes of the a different species in the same genus.


== median or mean containment at rank?
containent = % of a genome's k-mers that are shared
-- do using ALL of gtdb, BUT, start with just a single set of genomes.. e.g. Pseudomonas? == similar to "shared k-mers" paper [@doi:10.24072/pci.genomics.100001]

![**Protein k-mer containment facilitates genus-level comparisons**
10k pseudomonas genome sequences, median containment at each alphabet](images/pseudomonas_jaccard_vs_containment_prot10.png){#fig:evolpathsContain}
--->

![**Protein k-mers facilitate comparisons across species**
This currently uses the evolutionary paths dataset. Perhaps better to demonstrate with a different test set -- say, just the species, genus family level, using something like Pseudomonas that has a lot of published genomes. Also show jaccard to emphasize how it gets progressively worse when you start comparing genomes that are different sizes? Or separate figure for this...?](images/anchor-containment.nucl-prot.png){#fig:evolpathsContain}

_AAI vs CompareM AAI_

![**Scaled MinHash AAI vs CompareM**
GTDB Evolpaths dataset](images/gtdb95-evolpaths.AAI-concordance.png){#fig:evolpathsAAIvsCompareM height=2in}


### Alignment-free phylogeny recapitulates core-genome phylogeny

![**K-mer Based Sequence Identity by Lowest Common Taxon**
GTDB Evolpaths dataset](images/anchor-mcANI-AAI.boxen.protnucl.png){#fig:evolpathsANIAAI}

### Robust taxonomic classification using Sourmash Gather

Ref databases are incomplete (may not have good representation of sp. of interest).
Query genomes /mags/ metagenomes are incomplete.

#### Benchmarking Taxonomic Classification

First, we benchmarked protein-based gather classification using the high quality, highly complete reference genomes within the GTDB representative genome set.
For each genus, we randomly selected one reference genome for inclusion in the benchmarking reference database (n=9428).
For each genus with at least two species clusters, we randomly selected a second species within that genus for the test set of genomes (n=3911).
Thus, each test genome shares genus-level taxonomy with one (and only one) genome in the reference database.
Since we know that no test genome shares species-level taxonomy with the reference database, we used the lowest/least common ancestor approach described above to report taxonomic classifications at the genus level.
To assess the impact of 6-frame translation of nucleotide sequence on classification accuracy, we compared classification accuracy between published proteome queries and (6-frame) translated genome queries.
Using the same reference database, we selected an environmental dataset [@doi:] to assess the impact of genome completeness on taxonomic classification.

We compared gather-LCA classification to `GTDB-Tk`, a tool ...

We also generated nucleotide and protein Scaled MinHash reference databases for all GTDB representative genomes (release 95, n=31,910).


#### Classification is robust to incompleteness of query genome and reference database


#### Classification is robust to query genome contamination




	