## Methods

_general methods_

### Scaled MinHash Sketching with Sourmash

As implemented in sourmash [@https://dib-lab.github.io/2020-paper-sourmash-gather; @doi:10.12688/f1000research.19675.1; @doi:10.21105/joss.00027], Scaled MinHash is a MinHash variant that uses a scaling factor to subsample the unique k-mers in the dataset to the chosen proportion (1/`scaled`).
As k-mers are randomized prior to systematic subsampling, Scaled MinHash sketches are representative subsets that can be used for comparisons, as long as the k-mer size and chosen scaled value remain consistent. 
Unlike traditional MinHash sketches, Scaled MinHash sketches enable similarity estimation with containment, which permits more accurate estimation of genomic distance when genomes or datasets differ in size [@doi:10.1016/j.amc.2019.02.018;@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1875-0]. 

Sourmash supports sketching from either nucleotide or protein input sequence.
All genome sequences were sketched with sourmash v4.0 using the `sourmash sketch dna` command, k-mer sizes of 21,31,51, a scaling factor of 1000. 
Sourmash also supports 6-frame translation of nucleotide sequence to amino acid sequence.
To assess the utility of these translated sketches, genome sequences were also sketched with the `sourmash sketch translate` command at protein k-sizes (_kaa-mer sizes?_) of 7-12 and a scaling factor of 100. 
All proteome sequences were sketched with sourmash v4.0 using the `sourmash sketch protein` command at protein k-sizes (_kaa-mer sizes?_) of 7-12 and a scaling factor of 100.
Where higher scaling factors were evaluated, these original sketches were downsampled using the sourmash `downsample` method prior to conducting sequence similarity comparisons.


### Sequence Identity Estimation from Scaled MinHash
_(very DRAFTy)_

Sourmash contains standard implementations of Jaccard Index [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x] and Containment Index [@doi:10.1016/j.amc.2019.02.018] set comparisons.

**Estimating Sequence Similarity from Jaccard**
For a comparison between two genomes (genomeA, genomeB), the Jaccard Index represents the k-mers shared between the two genomes (sketch intersection) divided by the k-mers present in both sketches (sketch union).
Thus the Jaccard Index represents the percent of shared k-mers relative to all k-mers across both genomes (intersection/genomeA+genomeB).
MinHash Sketch Jaccard has been shown to correlate well with ANI at high sequence identities (>=90% sequence identity) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x].


**Estimating Sequence Similarity from Containment**
As the Jaccard Index utilizes the union of all k-mers in a dataset, it is greatly affected by differences in dataset size [@doi:10.1093/bib/bbz083].
The Containment Index instead represents the percent of a genome found in the comparison genome.
Containment is directional: while the number of shared k-mers is fixed for a pairwise comparison, the Containment of each dataset will depend on the unique k-mers found in that particular dataset. Containment for genomeA will be (intersecion/genomeA), while Containment for genomeB will be (intersection/genomeB).

Alignment-based ANI represents the sequence similarity of the alignable fraction of two genomes. In this way, ANI only compares the shared sequences, and discounts/ignores all other sequence present in either genome.
Bidirectional containment comparisons use the same numerator (shared k-mers), but may contain different numbers of non-shared k-mers in the denominator.

In cases where both genomes are high-quality and highly complete, we can most closely approximate ANI by using the maximum value between the bidirectional containment values: that is, using the comparison that represents the shared sequence over the genome with the smallest number of non-shared k-mers.

In cases where one genome is more trusted (high quality and highly complete), Containment may be best calculated relative to the trusted genome.
This use case also allows us to estimate sequence identity from larger sequence collections, such as metagenomes.
By definition, metagenomes contain k-mers from many organisms.
We can take advantage of directional Containment by calculating the Containment Index of Reference genomes that share many k-mers with the Metagenome.
We have already shown the utility of Containment for metagenome classification [@https://dib-lab.github.io/2020-paper-sourmash-gather], but now we can report estimated average sequence identity between the matching sequence regions and the reference genome.

**Sequence Identity via Mash Distance**

First, we use the published Mash Distance equations with Scaled MinHash sketches.


**Sequence Identity via Mutation Rate Intervals**
	



### GTDB "Evolutionary Paths" Dataset

The Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) provides a genome-based taxonomy for bacterial and archaeal genomes [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0501-8].
To assess the utility of Scaled MinHash techniques across evolutionary distance, we generated a series of "evolutionary paths" from the set of 31k representative GTDB genomes.
For each genus with at least two species clusters, one representative genome was randomly selected as a path "anchor" genome.
To build the path, one additional genome was selected from the representative genomes matching the anchor's taxonomy at each higher taxonomic rank.
Each path thus consisted of seven genomes: an anchor genome, a genome matching anchor taxonomy down to the genus level, one matching anchor taxonomy to the family level, one matching to the order level, and so on.
This creates a gradient of similarity, where comparisons to the anchor genome range from genus-level to superkingdom-level.
Path selection using the representative genomes in GTDB release 95 resulted in 2957 paths comprised of 6690 unique genomes (6543 Bacteria, 237 Archaea).
These paths include genome comparisons across 33 phyla (29 Bacteria, 4 Archaea), covering roughly a quarter of the 129 phyla (111 Bacteria, 18 Archaea) in GTDB release 95.
While paths are limited to taxonomies with at least two GTDB representative genomes for each taxonomic rank, these paths provide a rich resource for comparisons at increasing evolutionary distances. 

### Scaled MinHash Sequence Identity Correlates with Standard Methods

FastANI v1.32 ([@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9]; run with default parameters)  was used to obtain Average Nucleotide Identity between the anchor genome and each additional genome in its evolutionary path.
FastANI is targeted at ANI values between 80%-100%, so only values in this range are considered "trusted" and used in **assessing the correlation between Scaled MinHash estimates and FastANI._(TBD)_**

CompareM v0.1.2 ([@url:https://github.com/dparks1134/CompareM]; run with `--sensitive` parameter for DIAMOND mapping) was used to obtain Average Amino Acid Identity between the anchor proteome and each additional proteome in its evolutionary path.
CompareM reports the mean and standard deviation of AAI, as well as the fraction of orthologous genes upon which this estimate is based.
Briefly, CompareM calls genes for each genome or proteome using PRODIGAL [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3176] and conducts reciprocal best-hit mapping via DIAMOND [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-119].
By default, CompareM requires at least 30% percent sequence identity and 70% percent alignment length to identify orthologous genes.
As DIAMOND alignment-based homology identification may correlate less well with BLAST-based homology under 60% sequence identity [@url:https://rodriguez-r.com/blog/aai-blast-vs-diamond/], **we also ran compareM with a percent sequence identity threshold of 60% to obtain a set of high-confidence orthologous genes for AAI estimation. We report correlation between Scaled MinHash AAI estimation and each of these compareM parameter sets in XX _(TBD)_**. _CompareM was also used to obtain AAI values directly from each genome, using PRODIGAL to translate sequences prior to gene calling. These results [were not significantly different from proteome-based AAI estimation??] (Supplemental XX)._


### Taxonomic Classification with Sourmash Gather

- brief description of gather
- description of gather-based LCA aggregation to taxonomic rank


### Workflows and Computing

Reproducible workflows associated with this paper are available at XX (gh link + doi for release), with datasets available at OSF (XX). All workflows were executed using snakemake >= 5.26 [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.29032.1)] on the FARM cluster at UC Davis, using practices outlined in [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giaa140].		











